Chapter 1 / corrected
To a first-time cosmopolitan visitor, Takete-Ide may retain the trappings of nature. Its largely rustic iron roofs, standing atop mostly unpainted walls interspersed with pockets of modern houses, can ignite inspiration in a curious artist. A single major road from Olorunsogo to Ikoja-Omi, its main artery being at 'Ponna Aiyedayo that runs through it has never been corrupted by tar or concrete since the beginning of time. Several smooth foot paths through which people meander to their respective destinations adorn the terrain.
What can not be taken away is the serenity and scenery of this ancient habitation. A very flat land surrounded by a complex topography of uplands and inhabited by a hospitable, resourceful, and education-loving population.  
Takete-Idera: A People Standing in Comfort
Takete-Idera literally means ‘separated to a place of comfort/rest’. The short form of the suffix- Ide, is now more frequently applied in everyday conversation. Both words are used interchangeably. Irrespective of the form of its appendage, Takete is the name of a peace-loving community in Amuro District of the present MopAmuro Local Government Area in Yagba Federal Constituency of Kogi State. It is located on Latitude 8.16667 and Longitude 6.03333. This location is a distance of 18 kilometres from Mopa, headquarters of the Local Government and 16 kilometres off Kabba-Ilorin road at Effo-Amuro point. 
The village is one of the seven Towns/Villages that make up Amuro District. The others are Orokere, Aiyede, Okagi, Aiyedayo/Iloke, Otafun and Aiyeteju Agbajogun. It is the second largest of the seven villages. In its present site, Takete Ide shares boundary with three out of the remaining six Villages. It is bounded in the east by Otafun Amuro, in the south by Ayedayo Amuro and in the west by Ayede Amuro. This centrality, helped by other innate considerations may have influenced government’s decision to locate an Area Office of the Local Government in this ancient settlement, since 1991 when the council was created by the Babangida, military government (1985-1993)
Amuro is a linguistic contraction of Amu oro, meaning a pot filled with poisons. The people are bound together by common history of warfare, culture and religion. The ancient symbol of the community – a big pot filled with seven poisonous arrows, is believed to be the death-knell of any of the multifarious attackers that marauded the countryside in search of loots, slaves and sometimes simply for pure territorial expansions during the 18th and 19th centuries. Amuro people, like other ethnic stocks in their neighbourhood, are therefore no strangers to wars. 
Each town or village in Amuro has an administration that runs independent of the others, except in areas of defined common interests. Each village has a traditional council headed by the Oba. The Alamuro of Amuro (a title that was created only in 1934) is, however, the head of the Amuro Traditional Council and remains the paramount ruler. He is a graded chief, and by tradition, the Alamuro can not wear a beaded crown unless he is sanctioned by the Ooni of Ife. The number of beaded crowns in Yoruba land is already noted. 
The stool of the Alamuro is rotated among the seven villages. It has no fixed tenure. The holder remains in line. Once an Alamuro dies, the office moves to the next village in line. The seat of the Alamuro is presently in Aiyedayo/Iloke.   
Amuro people are of the Iyagba linguistic/ ethnic stock of northern Yoruba of Kogi west Senatorial Zone. The zone is made up of three federal constituencies, the remaining two being Kabba/ Bunu/ Ijumu and Lokoja/ Kotonkarffe, respectively. Over time, the 'I' in Iyagba has given way and it is now more commonly spelt as Yagba. Both Iyagba land and Kabba/ Bunu/ Ijumu with the Oworo people of Lokoja/ Kotonkarffe are collectively called Okun people, a Yoruba sub-group. Before the state was created on August 27th 1991, Okun people were formerly part of Kabba Province and the old Kwara State, in that order. In fact, Kabba town served as administrative headquarter of that Northern Nigeria Province for a brief period.   
The word okun simply means strength, vitality or power. It is also an expression of goodwill. The people are so named because of their common use of the four letter word 'okun' for salutation. It must be acknowledged however, that Ekitis and Igbominas (in Ekiti and Kwara States respectively) also use this form of greeting. According to Wikipedia, the Okun identity was first suggested by Eva Kraft-Askari during a field expedition in 1965. Okun land has different sub-groups namely Owe, Iyagba, Bunu or Abunu, Ijumu, Kiri, Gbede and Oworo. It is instructive that the various sub-groups share striking historical, cultural and linguistic affinities. Every Okun person almost effortlessly understands the language of another.   Okun people trace their roots to Yoruba land. Okun People and Okunland are historically part of Yotubaland of South West Nigeria.
Origin of Iyagba people 
Yagba Federal Constituency is made up of three Local Government Areas, with a total population of 331,329 (Official Gazette, 2009). They are Yagba-West, Yagba-East and MopAmuro. There are pockets of Yagba speaking people in Ekiti and Kwara States. Yagbaland covers an approximate land area of 3,454 square kilometres and shares boundaries with the Nupe in the North, Ekiti in the South and the Ijumu and Bunu in the South and East respectively. Little or nothing is known about the aboriginal inhabitants of Yagbaland. Even then it is safe to say that tradition is fairly settled that Yagba people migrated from a distant region to settle in their present location. 
The origin narratives on Yabga people were orally conveyed and handed down from one generation unto another. There are various accounts of the migration stories. Two are however more popular and acceptable among scholars than the others. One popular oral tradition account says that the patriarch of the Yagba was a prince from Ile-Ife. Legend holds the ancient town not only as the acceptable dispersal point of all Yoruba but also as the cradle of humanity. 
The Prince whose mission was mainly territorial expansion eventually arrived and settled in Yagba land after many conquests. Everyone dispersed from the Ile-Ife palace was required to bring prompt updates on their mission. But our subject was reported to have returned late to the palace in Ile-Ife to render account of his expedition. 
When he eventually did, he explained how he conquered and lost part of a large territory because he was over-powered by other migrants. Of course, he was blamed for the loss, and he responded impromptu, Iya agba lo jemi (meaning he lost part of the territory because there was no elderly person to counsel him). His listeners laughed, sympathised, and nicknamed him Iya agba. It was from that response that the Iyagba derived their name. The migrant returned to his new territory with a new name that has endured the ages to date. He received and sent messages as Yagba. People of Yagba-east and Mopa-Muro are more at home with the Ile-Ife ancestry.
In the second tradition, Iyagba assumes a new morphology and different semantics. Here, the word is a shrinkage of Iya-agba, meaning an old woman. This account states that the Yagba people are descendants of an old and famous princess from old-Oyo. In her hey days, she was said to have led a group of immigrants in search of economic wellbeing and peace to settle in the new country. Oyo-Ile was said to have been rattled by an external aggressor forcing the Princess to seek relocation to what became ilu Iya agba – town of the old woman, Iyekolo (2000)  quoted by Olayinka Aliu (2013) says the ancestors of Egbe, Odo-Ere, Eri hold firmly to the Oyo-Ile account. 
It has been accepted (Obayemi 1969) that the descents of Iya Agba from Ile Ife occupy Ijumu, Owe, Yagba East and MopAmuro areas, while the one from Oyo Ile occupy Egbe, Ere and Eri group areas (Yagba West).
On the surface, these accounts may appear contradictory and therefore unreliable. But a deeper reflection will immediately reveal striking meeting points. They both confirm that the Yagbas are migrants in their present location. Both traditions also emphasize their Yorubaness. In one narration they came from Ile-Ife and in the other they were from Oyo-Ile. Whichever way, the people are of a strong Yoruba lineage. 
Yagba people are hard working and highly independent minded. In spite of the cultural and historical affinity of the people, they did not have a single all powerful central political authority. Until the period of colonialism, the people were far from being organised into recognisable monarchies. Power resided more with the families and clans. Yagba people are traditionally and predominantly farmers, hunters and warriors.
Chapter 2
Takete-Ide: Story of a people’s search for peace           
Like the Biblical Jerusalem Takete-Ide today is located on a plain fertile land that is surrounded by a cascade of hilly ground. Oke Elegan to the south stands out in its size and wonderment among them. But smaller hills like Obasoro and Oroke Agodi to the west are high enough to task an ill equipped wayfarer. Of course, the people readily roam the field for game and are at home in this hilly terrain. 
It is a pleasant irony of sorts that the village is also well endowed with one other natural provision- water. Aside few boreholes sunk through government interventions and scanty privileged individuals, Takete-Ide has notable water bodies. Visitors from Ayede (west) axis must first cross the Owowo River to access it. Those from Otafun/Aghara (east) axis must bargain with Eba River. As for those approaching from Ayedayo, (south) their contention will be with Oga. Pockets of streams and springs also dot the landscape. They include Ibedo, Igan, Eba Omosofe, Gboruku, Pandara, and Omi Loke. Apart from serving domestic purposes, the water bodies were rich avenues for the youth to engage in swimming and fishing. The choice of this strikingly hilly mountainous range blended by its aquatic splendour as settlement by her founding fathers could not have been made in a hunch. Let us quickly check out the details.    
Takete-Ide was originally settled in a hilly and rocky terrain and was known and addressed as Ilu –Oke (Village on the hill), south–east of the present location. The community dates back three centuries. There is remarkable evidence of iron-works and brass casting lending credence to its ancient age. 
The people of Takete-Ide started out from a place called Amuro-Odo, meaning settlement of Amuro people. As the name confirms, it was a settlement of Amuro kiths and kin, including the present Itedo Amuro in Isanlu, headquarters of Yagba-East Local Government. In fact, if not for their location, Amuro should have been made up of 8 Towns or Villages. But geographical accidents has dislocated or threatened that ancestral bondage. Nevertheless,Amuro people remain one in brotherhood and spirit. Legend confirms that Amuro people lived together peacefully for ages in Amuro-Odo until the advent of Nupe wars in the 19th century, CE.     
Wars, toils and blood
Okun people occupy the Niger-Benue confluence area along with their neighbours, namely southern Nupe, to the north and to the east, Ebira and Igala. To the west of Okunland are other Yoruba sub-groups Ekiti and Igbominas. Nupe people inhabit the low basin formed by the valleys of the Niger and Kaduna rivers. They were an aggressive block of warriors and slave traders. For most of the later part of the eighteenth century and the early nineteenth century, the Nupe waged an amorphous but relentless war against their neighnours. Not long after the aggression took shape at the turn of the nineteenth century, the well-known Fulani Jihadist, Uthman Dan Fodio, came with his Islamisation message. The Nupes were subsequently incorporated into the Sokoto caliphate, and their war subsumed into the Jihad. 
Nupeland was divided among five emirates, namely Ramah/Bida, Lapai, Agaie,Shonga, and Lafiagi. Femi Kolapo, a researcher on the Nupe wars asserts that the non-Nupe neighbours  mainly the Okun all became entangled in the war and ended up in different levels of political dependency on the attackers, Each of the different groups regularly usurped any of the Okun family. In spite of the courageous defence by the Okun, the devastation was massive. The unfortunate effects of the wars - loss of freedoms, properties, captivity, enslavement, and forced deportation among others did not take time to surface. In any case, for most part of the Nineteenth Century, the entire area that became Nigeria was convulsed in similar wars and turbulence. 
That is the background of what eventually thwarted the long cherished peace of Amuro people and dislocated the community in no small measure. They came on horses with powerful bows and arrows to meet people that least expected war, sometimes in the dead of night, and practically subdued them. Although the aggressors were partly working for the spread of Islam on one hand and raiding for slaves on the other, their method could be likened to the resurfaced modern day banditry ravaging some parts of the country today. They operated as terrorists
Originally, Amuro Odo was located in a fertile plain field, right of the Niger River. This alluring geography made it easy for the aggressors to access and carry out their accursed missions in the area. In short the topography made it smooth for the Nupes to carry out successful raids. As the tales of woes, tears and blood continued, the elders took the inevitable decision to relocate from the beautiful scenery to an area that could offer more protection from the elements. Thus when the area became uncomfortable and absolutely unsafe, the people elected to move from Amuro Odo. This forceful migration saw the people moving in different directions sometimes in groups of two (closest kinsman) or alone. 
Where did the people of Takete go?
As indicated above, the people upon dispersal from Amuro Odo no longer settled in a single location. Instead, they were scattered in different but nonetheless contiguous areas. People that make up the present Takete and kinsmen in present day Otafun, first moved to the east of Amuro Odo to a place called Igbo Ide, which literally means grove or forest of comfort. The place was indeed a very comfortable fertile thick forest in which the people found solace. It was thick and a comfortable vegetation that the people thought they had put the Nupes and their deadly incursions behind them. So peaceful was this new settlement that they simply named it Igbo Idera. It must be emphasised that this first name was used by the two brothers, Takete and Otafun/ Igbo Ide today is a desolate farmland about a few kilometres north of Takete-Ide – Aghara road. Going from Takete-Ide to Otafun, Igbo Ide is on the left, while it is on the right when coming from Otafun to Takete-Ide. 
The new arrivals must have overrated the anticipated succour from their fresh abode. After an undetermined period of peace and economic recovery, the age-long horse riding enemies from Nupe land came calling again. They penetrated the grove and raided it with the ferociousness of an occupation force. They looted the place blind. Once beaten, twice shy. When the enemies took their leave and resumed a process of regular visits for harassments, the people again consulted their legs. In the current flight, however, the people set a new agenda. 
They embarked on comprehensive surveillance and resolved to look for a more fortified landscape. The splendour of the dream location was secondary. What was paramount was security and the need to ward off the Nupe brutality. The people now moved down southward again in search of a rough and upland terrain. They traversed the countryside in search of an ideal location. When they got to the Ibo area, their brothers, Otafun, decided to disengage from the labour and discontinued their journey with the Idera wayfarers. 
History has it that the then leader of the disengaging group was a textile expert. Legend described the man as a specialist in weaving white clothes. He was said to have persuaded the other Idera group to let everyone stay in the hilly area of Otafun. The Takete group remained adamant and said they would separate (Takete) and still look for a more hilly landscape. Subsequently, the people tagged the splinter group Otafunfun or Otafun, meaning weaver or seller of white...There is however another account. In the second narrative, Otafun is a short form of Okuta funfun, which refers to a stone, white stone. Tradition says there was a white stone that attracted the group, and they resolved “let’s go to the white stone to stay”. 
Anyway, the Takete group would not be discouraged from their set task. They continued to advance and over time arrived at a place they named Ilu-Oke, meaning town on the hill, where they preferred to sojourn. In their new settlement, the Nupe raids were no longer as regular and successful as it used to be. The people were also now better prepared against the intruders. Apart from their now more agreeable terrain, which made access to the enemies difficult, especially for horses, the people evolved more potent security measures through purely traditional wisdom. 
After a long spell of relative calmness and wellbeing, their peace was, however, again breached by their former enemies and a new entrant into the battle, Yoruba warriors from Ibadan. Again, the people put up stiff resistance and for a good period, remained impenetrable to the aggressors. However, as their woes had now increased by another leg in the foray, it was only a matter of time for this fortification to crumble. 
With the new threat to peace, they started considering moving further into the mountains. But they were bifurcated almost down the centre this time. Those who advocated fresh exodus eventually carried the day and proceeded to Okeata, a new location around Odede area. A small group, chiefly the Eseyin Meleri stayed back and took over the land. From then on, they controlled the entire area from Okuta gboro to Oke Eba through Agbara gidan down to Ibo and gheain the Otafun boarder. It was most probably around this time that the people invented and found solace in Agbagba Ide- a protective custody of no mean magic. 
The Agbagba Ide was a cave that offered the people unfailing protection from their enemies. According to tradition, once an endangered soul can approach its vicinity, the danger must pass him by. The people concluded in their native intelligence that there was something mysterious and mystical about the Agbagba. They were convinced it must have been sent from Orun, heaven, the abode of Olorun or Olodumare, God to give them complete deliverance from their marauders. The people had an esoteric means of appeasing the Agbagba Ide. The Nupes and the Ibadans permanently lost the type of fatal threats they used to pose. Their brutality no longer counted. As they aggressed, they suffered bloodied noses and serial defeats from a people they once humiliated. 
Realising the great potential of this mystery and in recognition of its enormous powers to deliver from the enemy, they devised its movable representation or prototype. It was not unlikely that the people sometimes took the prototype to battle to scare away enemies, something similar to the way Jews of the Old Testament used the Ark of the Covenant as recorded in the scriptures. It is, therefore, little wonder that the Agbagba Ide is the symbol of Takete Ide. The Agbagba Ide today is still believed to be a strong source of protection by Olorun for Takete-Ide people. To further prove the veracity of the legend above, an ancient anthem handed down through the ages to the present is apt. Here it is.
Takete-Ide anthem
Takete Ide ilu olokiki, ngha tedo h’owo oke
Nghun gbpgbo aiye ri
Olorun gha ape o, ngho daagha hi Takete
 
Agbagba Ide gbogbo /2*
O le ha h’abe re ojo a paa
Ide ni unkan a mo mo /2*
Ile nghin san ghun wara at’oyin
Eje a howo po t’agbe Takete Ide ga
Solo/ T’agbe Tahete Ide ga
All/ T.agbe Takete Ide ga
Eje a ho wo po t’agbe Takete Ide ga 
Oriki Agbagba Ide
The Oriki, a praise cognomen coined by our patriarch which has survived through the ages to the present also herald the strength of the Agbagba Ide. Here it is:
Oriki Agbagba Ide
Agbagba Ide gbogbo
Oni e ha h’abe re ojo a pa
Ide ni nkan a mo mo
Agbodo gbodo ina
A ja gbara gbara
Ja gun lolo, j’agun okuta
O s’owo ota nain kurugbe kurugbe
Ore ota nain m’olo re’la
O m’owo ota nain s’apoporo joko
Asere sere eho
Ol’ofe mi ‘ro ojo
A mi g’orun ghanghan l’ekikan 
As the wars were winding to a close, many of the groups that went to Okeata returned to Iluoke. But the Eseyin telu group opted not to go back. Impressed by the fertility of their new arable terrain, they took over the land farming all along the present Takete Ide. Their farming activities extended all the way from Odede, through Igbola to a small stream after an Oparun vegetation along Iluke road.
The new site: Home at last             
That was how the wanderings went in the migration narratives of our forefathers. A man named Thomas Ode is credited to be the first progenitor to settle in the present location. As the name suggests, Pa. Thomas was a hunter. In those days when wild animals and elemental forces ruled the jungle, and even up to date, hunters were not ordinary beings. They were partly professional seers, sorcerers, and herbalists. They roamed the jungles adequately fortified with one tool of divination or the other. Pa. Thomas’ fame in clairvoyance was well known. For instance, he was said to have possessed the mystical power to turn an anthill into an antelope or any such animal whenever he suffered a lulll in his hunting engagements in the jungle.
While on a hunting expedition through the forest, Pa Thomas was said to have consulted the oracle as a routine. As he poured the Obi Ifa, a prophetic instrument made of cola nuts, it was immediately revealed to him the formidable nature of the land on which he trod. He repeated the inquest several times over, receiving the same verdict. Each time, he got the same message that the place was not only good for habitation but would never fall under enemy attack.
Elated and promptly, Pa Thomas took the good news back to Iluoke and principally to his co-hunters. His colleagues were joyous about the revelation. And even though they did not doubt its veracity, they decided to seek further divine opinion as confirmation. Again, this select and respected band put the necessary things in motion to access the mind of Divinity on the matter. Without delay, it was revealed to each and every one of them the same message that had been given to their forerunner. 
Once verification was obtained and circulated in the countryside, the people began their downward journey from the hill to the plain that flowed with milk and honey. Odo Takete promptly descended to its present location. Oke Adan also did the same. Oke Ako had a stop-over at Aiyetoro, near Agbaraunkule, before eventually joining their kiths and kin in their present location. The migrations from the uplands to the low plains took place in 1926 or thereabouts, according to records. The first child to be born in the new location was Pa. George Fiki. It is somehow fortuitous that his younger brother, Joshua was to emerge  several decades later first as the Olude, and later as the Alamuro. Oba Joshua fiki reigned from 198× - 200×
The people have since their relocation been living together in unbroken love and common brotherhood. It is now nearly a century, and no records of communal suspicion, let alone war have been heard among them.
The name initially given to the new location was Ileteju or flat land. The name carried within it an acknowledgement of the people’s recent hectic experience that turned them to mountain dwellers. Ileteju was fertile and beautiful. The environment had also thus far been very peaceful. Gone were the devastating horses and their hostile riders. Farms yielded plentiful as they no longer witnessed the very rampant and destructive trespass of the horses. In perfect fulfilment of the prophecies, a moment of prosperity, calmness and peace was palpable in the air. 
The people had complete vacation from their woes. In fact, they now dwelt once again in absolute if not heavenly comfort. Ileteju no longer sufficiently reflected their new and pleasant station in life. They needed a fresh identity. After subjecting the matter to some form of public discussion, they reached for their bag of names and carefully coined a new appellation, Takete-Idera, which reflected everything sensational, surreal, energetic, independent and wholesome. It is a cognomen that has stayed alive to its meaning over the ages.
As stated before, political leadership in Takete-Ide resides in the Takete-Ide Traditional Council under the leadership of the Olu’de and his Council of Chiefs. The present Olu’de Oba Philip Ebilakun is the thirteenth Olu’de in history. Below is a list of past Olu’des;
NAME
FAMILY
WARD/COMPOUND
Olude opalu
Olude Ide
Olude Oriko
Olude Atte Gbogori
Olude Orunmbe
Olude Obadofin Obere
Olude Obaba Omologun
Olude Obajemu Atepa
Olude Elewa
Olude Obajemu Ate
Olude Alufa Olukotun
Olude J.A Fiki
Atemayi
Eseyintelu
Oriko
Atemesami
Eseyintelu
Atemeji
Atemeto
Atemogbe
Eseyinmeleri
Atejagbo
Atejaba
Atemayi
Oke-Ako
Ile-Nla
Osikegun
Osikegun
Osikegun
Oketaro
Oke-oja
Oke-oja
Osikegun
Osikegun
Oketaro
Oke-Oja
Religion 
Religion is a vital aspect of culture. It is described as the relationship between man and a Supreme Being (or his intermediaries), both of which are believed to have unlimited powers over his affairs. Confronted by his largely lack of understanding of his environment, his world, and the myriads of problems that plague his endeavours, right from the beginning, man has been in fervent search for the essence of life. The complexities of living in a world characterised by extreme platitudes such as glut and famine, surplus and scarcity, rain season and dry season, heat and cold, hunger and satisfaction, peace and war among others gave rise to equally extreme emotions like joy and sadness, love and hatred, etc etc. 
All men have been involved in different degrees in efforts to reconcile the conflicts. Only at death is man truly set free from this task. Religion is perhaps man’s first and most enduring attempt to reconcile and explain the conflicts of existence. It is therefore inherent in every culture. So invigorating are its effects that the legendary 19th century German philosopher, Karl Max described it as the opium of the people. It is a strong belief in a supernatural power or powers that control human destiny. It is the belief in the existence of a god (Supreme Being) or gods and the activities that are connected with their worship. I
There are many systems of faith that believe in the existence of god. They include the following:
(i)              Christianity: Religion based on the teaching of Jesus Christ and the belief that He is the Son of God. The Holy Bible is its scripturre.
(ii)            Islam: Islamic religion   is based on the belief in one God, Allah, as revealed to his prophet, Mohammed. The Holy Quran is its scripture.
(iii)         Hinduism: This is the main religion of India and Nepal. It includes the worship of one or more gods and a strong belief in re-incarnation.
Other systems opposed to the above beliefs are:
(i)              Agnosticism: this system doubts the existence of any god as it is not possible to prove their existence.
(ii)            Atheism: This system does not believe in the existence of God or any god, for that matter.
Under where did our fathers fall or belong?
Takete Ide indigenes like other Africans did not fall into any of the above systems. In Africa, religions are localised. Before the advent of Islam and Christianity, Africans had always believed in the existence of God or gods. They were also confronted by the unresolved conflicts of creation briefly alluded to above and saught limited answers to them as best they could. Every ethnic group in the continent has a unique name for God and well-defined ways for his worship. For instance, the Igbo calls him Chukwu, Hausa calls him Ubangiji, and Ebira calls him Ohomorihi, and Igala calls him Ojo. Among the Yoruba, to which Takete-Ide and indeed all Okun people trace their descent, God is simply Olodumare or Olorun  
The founding fathers of Takete-Ide and all her sons and daughters believe in the existence of God who lives above or in the sky. He is called Orisa Oke or Olu Orun (king of heaven). Although the people may associate his primary residence with Orun, they nevertheless conceived of him as all powerful and present everywhere. They were, however, very physical or practical people and therefore sought a less abstract representation of the deity.  Obviously, they could not see him or talk directly to him. Thus, they carved wooden images or idol, which they then used as intermediaries between them and Orisa Oke, who they also called Obarisa (the king of all Orisas). 
The people had and maintained personal relationships with the deity through pouring of libations, sacrifices, and other acts of worship. They communed with him through his designated messengers who could be herbalist, diviner, sorcerer, or seer. The select groups are believed to possess certain uncanny ability to communicate with God and bring the petitions of less fortunate patrons to his attention. The people offered prayers to Olu Orun using incantations and charms. 
When the outside world came in contact with Africa, they did not understand the African worldview and the challenges of hunger, insecurity, and disease that daily confronted his daily search for fulfilment. As the colonial masters and missionaries wallowed in the dark about African Traditional Religions and were unable to appreciate their intricacies, they hurriedly dubbed them pagans and idol worshippers Both terms are pejorative and derogatory. Pagan is from the Latin word paganus, which means rural or rustic. It was originally used to designate someone who lived outside the Roman Empire, then a world power and centre of civilization. Idolatory was wrongly applied because the missionaries thought the people saw the idols as ends in their own rights, whereas. they were mere means to a higher end. They made up the physical representation of a religious festival called the Egungun.  
Before Ilu-Oke people had contact with white men, there were two major groups of idol worshippers to borrow words from the missionaries.
(i)              Agado group named after the name of the head idol- Agado.
(ii)            Oliwo group - also named after the head idol- Oliwo. 
Each group celebrates three day annual worship of the Supreme Being with sacrifices to the head- Agado or Oliwo. These annual festivals or ceremonies called Epa, Oro, or Egungun festival witness a display of many masquerades. The festivals hold at the onset of the rain season between the months of May and June. As a rule, only the male gender carry masquarede in Takete-Ide
The masquerade or maskers dress up as spirits. They use special beautiful costumes and wear head pieces of either feathers or the wooden image.
Each of the Egungun groups has other minor images. They are Akorowo, Ate, Origi, Apa rege rege and Ototu moba. The first two are dressed in special and colourful embroidery, wearing petals of feathers on their heads. The Akorowo is the basic Egungun group and exclusive to children. It makes a whistling sound and heralds the opening of the festival with its well-known Akoho. An Akorowo can either parade alone or in the company of other neophytes. It neither harbours nor displays spiritual powers. The Ate wears a wheel-like glass fastened ring laced with feathers on its head. They usually move in twos, making groaning but nonetheless musical sounds. 
The last three sets, Origi, Apa rege rege and Otutumoba, like the mother cult, each wear a wooden image of different dimensions and costumes. The Origi makes a guttural sound, while the Otutumoba humes. The Apa is the only one in the lot without a sound. Each wooden image has a cavity at its posterior end large enough for a human head to go in and two openings or shits through which a man wearing the image can see and another for the mouth.
Each Egungun festival lasts Three Days of Elaborate Parade and celebrations. The days are determined through divine consultations. Each festival is preceded by "Ihunde" or "Ijo Arihun" - sleepless day. On that day, initiates of the cult keep a night vigil and procession. People can listen to the noise of the celebrants, without seeing or looking at them. Women and children are especially bared from beholding them. An infraction can attract dire consequences. 
On the first day, scores of men and youth put on their costumes and match in a procession along a definite route in the village with songs and jubilations. The match ends up at an open level ground where each masker will dance with acrobatic displays. On the second day, the maskers come out either single or in pairs to beg for alms from house to house and to return later in the day to the dance square for entertainment of spectators. The same process is repeated on the third and final day of festivities. 
On the last day, elaborate time is given for consultations and prophetic declarations. On that day, patrons of various challenges ranging from bareness, joblessness, ill health, or even for a desire for success in business approach the Agado or Oliwo for divine intervention. Prescriptions are determined, and predictions are made. Declarations could be communal or individualized. Patrons usually express relief from their worries after the consultations. 
Singing and dancing are very critical aspects of the festivals. All through the period masquerades are accompanied by a band of supporters singing, clapping and dancing to sensational lyrics accompanied by a cacophony of sounds from Oye, Aje, Elu, Akutu and such other musical instruments as may be available per time. 
Of note is the tourism potential of the Egungun festival. It attracts  patrons from far and wide. Members of the Egungun cult from surrounding communities generously participate in the festivals, thereby boosting the domestic economy.
Masquerade or Egungun festival is predominantly a masculine cult. Females were forbidden from coming close to the shrine, located some distance away from the dancing ground. The women worshipped two goddesses, Otegun and Orisa. Unlike Agado and Oliwo, these goddesses were not represented by idols or images.
For their dancing, the women did not wear blouse or gown. They only use wrappers to cover their breasts and a strap of cloths tied around their waist to hold the wrappers in place. In addition, a necklace of Ileke or Akun beads and beautiful bangles on their wrists add glamour to their appearance. Finally; various types of tattoos are painted on their faces to complete their apparel.
There were other social-cultural associations with varying degrees of religious content. Alase is a fiery and powerful Egungun cult group that comes out only on demand. The Alase was not originally domiciled in Takete-Ide but usually invited on demand. However, since about the last five decades or so (early eighties), the cult has become domesticated. The Alase is dressed in red apparel and wears a masque. It is accompanied by an interpreter and messenger called Orobo. 
The Ojingindo- a masquerade made purely of palm fronts harbours little or no spiritual content. They move in pairs and whistle as a means of communication. They come out only in the evening/night and forbid light. 
The Ojongindo can be a threat to its enemies and does not hesitate to taunt them through proverbial renditions in whistles and sometimes by applying the rod on its victims.
Saaji, Erembe, and Iro are almost extinct. In the times of yore, they were ceremonial masquerades associated with the death of important persons.
Agbo-Jegejege - a routine leafy embroidery used by male children for occasional harassment of others, is rare today. 
Some men and rarely women belong to the Ogboni Fraternity. It was a secret cult of adult men and a few women-an association for mutual benefits and protection of members. 
Music and Entertainment
The Paalongo and Ogbeele were ancient musical groups that churn out sonorous renditions to entertain spectators at important ceremonies or during rehearsals. The groups had band leaders and regular days, and time of engagement. Prominent among their instruments were Oye, Agogo, Akutu, Elu, Aje, etc.  
Children have different ways of entertainment. These included Igidi (wrestling) Ikiti (gymnastics), moni moni,(hide and seek) itan, aalo, (story-telling and fables)  mori mo mori and demdi e yoro. (prank playing sort of). There were other recreational activities for nearly all age grades. They 
included Ayo or Ise, tete, Igo tita and Ire hiha. 
In a nutshell, that was Takete-Ide in a state of nature.
                                                   
Chapter Four
The birth of Christianity
The previous chapters have laid the foundation of wars through which the trade in humans, aka slave trade, flourished. Of course, Africa was a major supplier of the slaves transported to Europe and America for forced labour. While their sweat, toil, and tears were used to develop the economy of distant regions, Africa remained prostrate.
The abolition of the slave trade became the catalyst needed for Christianity to be embraced by Africans. Following the total eclipse of the trade in humans therefore the new religion spread with the speed of wild fire. Many individuals and groups forayed enthusiastically into the continent from Europe and the West to make disciples of men. However, much as these men were hungry and thirsty of liberating souls for Christ, Millions of Africans were still going into their graves without knowing Christ. 
Many Christian missions ventured into the then ‘dark continent’ at great personal risks to their lives and welfare. Yet many remained unsaved and, in fact, never heard of Christ. Statistics made available by missionaries estimated that in the African hinterland in the area, then known as Sudan (and sometimes spelt Soudan), about 60 million souls were yet to hear about the Christ and his redemption mission! 
A certain woman in far away America - Mrs Gowan was really disturbed by this sad situation that she bore the ‘burden of the Sudan,’ painfully but prayerfully in her spirit for years. She had constraints that made it impossible for her to visit the continent. But she devoted her time and energy to prayers for God to send men that would evangelize the Sudan and other places yet to encounter Jesus Christ. She prayed without ceasing on the subject and patiently waited for an answer to her yearnings. The answer came in due season - that was in 1893. From that year, there were at least three evangelistic explorations that culminated in the birth of SIM. Let us take a quick look.
A faith that fears nothing: Three daring young men
Barely three weeks to Christmas on December 4th, 1893, three young men discarded their comfort and arrived on the shore of Lagos. Their single mission was to penetrate what was regarded as the darkest continent in order to preach the Gospel of Christ to the natives. They were      
Walter Gowans, a Canadian (the only son of Mrs Gowans, the bearer of the burden of the Sudan) Rowland V Bingham, also a Canadian and Thomas Kent, an American.
On arriving at the Nigerian coast, the men were reported to have made contact with the Methodist missionaries on the ground, most likely with the mind of getting relevant support from them. They were wrong. The senior colleagues did not have kind words for the young men. The Superintendent of the Methodist Mission in West Africa based in Lagos was quoted as saying: “Young men, you will never see the Sudan, your children will never see it, your grand children, may be.”
The three young men had their minds made up and would not be distracted from their mission by nay Sayers. In an apparent response to the unfavourable prediction, therefore, Gowans wrote “Our success in this enterprise means nothing less than the opening of the Sudan for the Gospel. Our failure at the most, nothing more than the death of two or three. But if we fail, it would be our fault through lack of faith. God is faithful. He faileth not... Because he uses death as well as lives to the furtherance of His cause, after all, is it worth a venture? Sixty million souls are at stake.” 
As the story goes, the three missionaries refuse to be discouraged. As they had already left all comfort behind, they elected not to count the cost. They actively began their mission, engaging the natives wherever they went and introducing Christ to them. From Lagos through Abeokuta, they proceeded up north, enduring hash climatic and health conditions. In those days, malaria was the number one cause of death in Africa. Many Europeans and other foreigners considered the continent as the ‘Whiteman’s grave'.’ 
Anyway, our subjects kept at their work, reaching beyond the middle belt region of Nigeria and making converts all the way. But that was not to last for long. About a year into the work, disaster knocked in torrents. First, on November 17th, 1894, Walter Gowans died of malaria. He died in a location near Zaria. The death left the company in a mourning mood. As if that was not bad enough, barely two weeks later, precisely on December 8 1894, Thomas Kent followed suit. He died in Bida present Niger state. He also died of malaria - the reigning killer disease. 
As it turned out, Bingham - the last man standing - became a lone ranger. Life must have really been miserable for the Canadian, seeing his fellow missionaries dying on the field. But he continued his endeavours in the now clearly deadly mission field. However, about five months later, in May 1895, the bereaved evangelist returned home in Canada alone. He also had a burden and difficult message to deliver about the whereabouts of his fallen colleagues. But to his pleasant surprise, when Mrs. Gowan heard about the death of her only son, she took it in good fate. “Well, Mr. Bingham, I would rather have had Walter Golwans go out to the Sudan and die there all alone than have him home today, disobeying the Lord.” (Obaro 2012). 
The second pioneer party and formation of Sudan Interior Mission, SIM 
Although he had been thoroughly beaten and fagged out from his experience in Africa, Bingham felt like a fish out of water when he returned to Canada. He felt a burning desire to return to the continent. But memories of the demise of his former partners constituted a clog in the wheel of actualising his ambition. Was he to set out for Africa alone? After pondering over the matter for considerate period, he sought and got new partnership with one Mr. Moline and Mr. Taylor. 
The new team arrived Nigeria sometimes in the year 1900, about five years after his earlier but forced retreat from the area. Although they were discouraged by other missionaries, like the first time, they refused to budge.  It was a happy company and they zealously pursued their business of spreading the Gospel. Not long after the commencement of their mission, disaster again knocked on the door. 
Bingham became seriously ill with malaria, just about three weeks into his second missionary journey. Worried about his fast deteriorating health, other missionaries rallied round, to take him back home. His new partners promised to stay behind and continue the work. They assured him of their willingness to keep the gospel flame aglow. Sadly, however their resolve could not stand the test of time. They were said to have been discouraged by other missionaries and they too returned home by the next boat. That was how the second missionary journey of this rugged Christian soldier ended. But, Bingham would not give up. 
On his return home, he recuperated and continued to ruminate on how best to evangelize the Sudan. He had learnt his lessons the hard way and was determined not to let the experience waste. He met some groups of young men and women who also had passion for the Gospel. They were from different fields, churches and backgrounds. After series of consultations on the dying souls in Africa, the groups came together to form the Sudan Interior Mission, SIM in Toronto, Canada. It was little surprise that Bingham became its pioneer General Director.   
The third mission attempt and first converts 1901 
After using the later part of the year for the formation and consolidation of SIM, members immediately commenced moves to send men out to the target area for evangelization. Thus, in 1901 a party of four men was dispatched for the assignment. Members of this group were  
i.                 Mr D.A Anthony
ii.               Charles Robinson
iii.             Albert Taylor (Most probably the same that accompanied Bingham during the second visit above)
iv.             A.V Banfield (later joined the team)
It should be noted that in the first 30 years of missionary activities in the Sudan, hardly did they have converts among the locals, Yet, the number of casualties that attended the enterprise was rather too high. But even at that, the missionaries were not discouraged. They kept at their goal, trusting God to bring the harvest. The third mission attempt marked a turning point in the aspiration of these men. 
The group of four found tremendous favour in the sight of God and men, Lord Lugard, then Governor-General of colonial Nigeria became an instrument of this favour. Apart from agreeing to board them on British Government’s boat, he helped them in every way possible. With strong determination and government backing to facilitate their engagements, the missionaries recorded serial successes. 
They opened their first mission station in Lafiagi in present Edu Local Government Area of Kwara State. Within two years of their engagement however, only one was left on the mission field. In 1903, Mr. Anthony and Robinson were rushed back very sick. The duo never returned to Nigeria. Therefore the youngest of the company A.W Banfield, was the only one left to continue the work from 1903. 
In spite of the challenge, the work continued to prosper. Two other missionaries Mr. F.E Hein and Dr. Andrews Park latter joined the field. This later group was responsible for the opening of a second SIM station in Wushishi in present Niger State, between 1904 and 1907. Incidentally, it was around this period that Christianity entered Yagba land. 
ln 1905, a new entrant into the mission circle Mr. E.P Lang joined the Patigi group. From there, he trekked to Ogga in present Yagba West Local Government Area of Kogi state. The missionary was pleasantly shocked to meet one Mr. Daniel Orisanaiye reading a Yoruba Bible in Ogga when he arrived in the town. He continued his engagement to other areas only making occasional visits to Ogga in 1906 and 1907. During his third visit, he celebrated his first Christmas in Yagba land. It is instructive to note that before Mr. Banfield finally left Africa on account of ill health, he had translated the Bible into Nupe language almost single handed. He also established the seeds of Niger Press, which metamorphosed into today’s E.P.L in Patigi during his days. 
Tommie Titcombe and SIM activities in Yagba land 
As noted above Lang holds the credit as the first missionary in Yagba land. Not long after his arrival however, specifically in 1908, another missionary, Tommie (Thomas) Titcombe arrived and practically changed the pace and face of mission work in the area. Not without a story. The young Canadian had a burning desire for mission work. He was however rejected twice, each time he went to SIM office for interview to assess his suitability for evangelism.
Thomas was small in stature and did not really look impressive. When Rowland Bingham the SIM Director rejected him for the second time he calmly said he was ‘going to Africa anyway.’ When he was asked about which board he was going under, Tommie replied, ‘I don’t know, Mr. Bingham. It may be some old woman’s wash board, but I’m going to Africa.’ Seeing the raw determination, Mr. Bingham soon afterwards relented and accepted him on SIM.  
He eventually arrived and settled in Egbe, establishing a third SIM station in the town. Within a year of his arrival, Titcombe had learnt and became fluent in his mastery of the local language. He mixed freely with the natives attending not only to their spiritual needs but also to their medical and physical welfare. 
In May 1909, the whiteman preached his first sermon in Yagba dialect inside the market in Egbe. From his base in Egbe, Titcombe paid regular visits to other places in the neighbourhood for evangelism. On October 31st 1909, ten (10) men and three (3) women were baptised in Ogga. This was the first baptism by SIM and one David Adeniyi was among the new communicants. Titcombe was a very fervent, selfless and industrious missionary. 
In 1911 Rev. W. Playfair another committed man of God joined Titcombe in Egbe and together they laboured in the vineyard of the Lord, preaching the gospel fearlessly. A year into Fanfair’s presence in 1912, Egbe witnessed the first water baptism of converts. A total 119 people made up of eighty-three (83) men and thirty-six (36) women were baptised on that occasion. What a glorious moment it was for the missionaries and the new converts. Christianity had taken a deep root in Yagba land. 
In 1915 the first Egbe Annual Conference held. During the conference, another one hundred (100) believers received water immersion. The same year, on December 15th Titcombe got married to Ethel Mcintosh in Minna. The young couple got to Egbe two days before Chistmas and it turned out to be a most eventful and destiny changing decision, as we will later see. Any way, now married, the young couple devoted their time and resources to evangelism taking the gospel to new Virgin lands.